Add new doc section with guidelines and best practices. (#1739)
zeek/spicy: doc/programming/guidelines.rst

across several units.

Hence, it's useful to remember the following four rules on Spicy
performance:

    1. Do as much work as needed in your Spicy analyzer, but not more.
       For example, what you can do in Zeek, do there.

    2. If you're in doubt about the performance impact of some Spicy
       code, do a benchmark.

    3. Rule 2: If you think you know the performance impact of some
       Spicy code, do a benchmark!

    4. In practice, it might all not matter that much anyways!

To explain Rule 4: When you are writing a parser for a network
protocol in Spicy, the resulting performance is a direct factor of the
amount of traffic that parser will be processing. For example, in a
typical Zeek setup, where you network carries a mix of various
protocols, your parser will see only a subset of the overall traffic.
And if you aren't going for the handful of most common high-volume
protocols (e.g., HTTP, DNS, TLS), then your parser will very likely
end up processing only a tiny fraction of the overall traffic. At that
point, its runtime performance is going to be dwarfed by everything
else Zeek is doing. Hence, take the following with a grain of salt.

> Usually it's best to get you parser working first, then benchmark to

Author: That sounds to me like a separate section somewhere that we would just link to from over here. I won't tackle that within the scope of this PR.

see if you need to improve performance, and finally find the primary
bottlenecks of needed.

> .. _performance_runtime:

Author: Actually I prefer the explicit style because it means we can change the section titles without breaking links.

    - additional C++ code that is generated by the Spicy compiler
    - use of expensive Spicy constructs
    - poorly managed objects hogging memory (both on stack and heap)

Below are some strategies to make the runtime performance as efficient as possible.

.. rubric:: Avoid declaring public units

The Spicy compiler generates additional code for ``public`` units,
thereby increasing both compile and execution times. Defining units as
``public`` is only required for top-level units where parsing starts
(i.e., with Zeek: the units that you enter into your EVT file). The
attribute can be omitted otherwise.

.. rubric:: Turn unreferenced vectors into anonymous fields

Implement vectors that don't need to be referenced from your code as
:ref:`anonymous fields <anonymous_fields>` (i.e., do not provide a
name for the field). Normal, named fields store the whole vector
accumulating all parsed elements over the lifetime of the defining
unit; whereas anonymous vector field forgo storage, because nobody
could access the fields anyways.

The most common pitfall here is top-level units that parse a sequence
of PDUs:

.. code::

    public type MyPDUs = unit {

>         msgs: Message[]; # accumulates all messages until end of session
>         : Message[];     # anonymous field, no accumulation

Reviewer: I would clearly call out antipatterns, e.g., here

```suggestion
        msgs: Message[]; # DANGEROUS: accumulates all messages until end of session
        : Message[];     # SUGGESTED: anonymous field, no accumulation
```

There might be more instances below where this might help people stay clear of copying the incorrect line.

    };

.. rubric::  Skip unused fields

Don't parse data that is not needed. Parsing data into a field will
cause a copy of that data into a dedicated memory location. Instead,
use the :ref:`skip keyword <skip>` to discard data that isn't of
interest, which leads the compiler to generate optimized code for many
field types, including in particular ``bytes``, literals, and
generally fields of fixed size. Examples:

.. code::

    public type Message = unit {
        unused1: uint32;            # parse and store
        unused2: skip uint32;       # skip over 4 bytes

        unused3: bytes &eod;        # extract and store remaining data
        unused4: skip bytes &eod;   # skip over remaining data
    };

.. rubric::  Avoid Spicy strings and string manipulation

> Use Spicy :ref:`strings <type_string>` sparsely in your analyzer, and
> stick to :ref:`bytes <type_bytes>` instead where you can. Typically,
> you would convert ``bytes`` to strings as late as possible just before
> presentation to the user (including passing to Zeek events). Strings
> are never needed for the parsing process itself.

Reviewer: Re: passing to Zeek, Zeek automatically converts Spicy `bytes` to Zeek `string`s so no explicit conversion is needed (unless users want to cache the conversion results). Maybe this instead:

```suggestion
Use Spicy :ref:`strings <type_string>` sparsely in your analyzer, and
stick to :ref:`bytes <type_bytes>` instead where you can. Typically, Spicy code
would use ``bytes`` throughout and only convert to ``string`` if a ``string`` is
required as a function call argument, or operations only supported by ``string``
need to be performed. When passing ``bytes`` to Zeek in EVT files they will be
converted to Zeek ``string`` values automatically. Strings are never needed for
the parsing process itself.
```

Author: While bytes convert to strings automatically for events, that doesn't take character sets into account. I'll try to clarify that.

As a corollary, avoid Spicy string manipulation. Always
manipulate/concatenate ``bytes`` and convert only the final result to
Spicy strings, probably in a ``%done`` hook or an EVT event. In

> particular, format strings come with a significant overhead. In other

Reviewer: Nit: personally triggered by "overhead", maybe this?

```suggestion
particular, format strings are not cheap to compute. In other
```

Author: Merging the two to stay with active voice. :-)

words, avoid use of ``%s`` to generate strings from ``bytes``.

.. rubric::  Don't use temporary variables of expensive types just for readability

Don't use temporary variables just to improve readability. In
particular, ``string`` and ``bytes`` (that are implemented as C++
strings under the hood and can be expensive to use) need to be
allocated and destroyed. This may introduce relevant overhead as it

> cannot be guaranteed that the C++ compiler will be able to optimize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cannot be guaranteed that the C++ compiler will be able to optimize away the temporary in
```

the code generated by Spicy. To improve readability, comments are the
tool of choice. In theory, benchmarking the impact of using a
temporary variable is a valid approach as well. However, the benefit
of slightly increased readability most likely does not justify the

> effort of benchmarking.

Reviewer: Especially the last sentence is weird since we say on top that benchmarking is the ultimate guideline so it is unclear to me why we talk about trade offs between readability and benchmarking at all. We could probably replace all this with: _If in doubt, benchmark._

.. rubric::  Remove unnecessary hooks

Multiple hook handlers with different priorities can be defined in
various places like inside a unit or, with Zeek, in EVT files.
However, hooks (either unit or field) should be avoided when not
needed. Using hooks comes with a performance cost because of
additional code generated by the compiler, which executes during
parsing. While ``%init`` hooks are often used for initializing unit
variables, we can often eliminate them by providing default values in
the variable definition:

.. code::

    public type Message = unit {

        on %init {
            self.A1 = 23;     # explicit initialization through hook
        }

        var A1: uint32;
        var A2: uint32 = 23;  # implicit initialization through default value
    };

.. rubric::  Avoid recursion

> The Spicy compiler allows declaration of recursive units with runtime
> conditions dictating when the recursion terminates. However,
> benchmarking has revealed that recursion introduces much higher
> overheads as compared to unrolled linear/iterative code performing
> similar functionality. This overhead is due to increased lifetimes of
> the units, data and their associated hooks; as well as less potential
> for compiler optimization due to additional internal machinery around
> the recursive calls.

Reviewer: I would rephrase it to remove the "revelations" (which would seem weird for an in-tree doc),

```suggestion
The Spicy allows declaration of recursive units with runtime conditions
dictating when the recursion terminates. A recursive grammar dictates that
units higher up in the recursion chain to be kept around until the overall
recursion terminates. This incurs additional memory overhead and might reduce
potential for optimizations. A unrolled linear/iterative implementation does
not have these issues.
```

Author: I'll try to tweak it a bit differently.

.. rubric::  Inline small nested units

> The Spicy compiler is not smart enough yet to inline nested units.
> Since declaration of units incurs additional cost to maintain their
> associated state and hooks, it is advisable to manually inline small
> units where performance is critical.

Reviewer: Let's not call ourselves dumb,

```suggestion
Spicy currently does not inline small nested units. Since setting up new unit
values is not free small inlining small units into their parent unit can
increase runtime performance, especially where it is an identified bottleneck.
```

Author: That new text doesn't quite parse for me. I also don't have problem calling myself dumb. :-) But I'll tweak it a bit to tone down the "it is advisable".

compilation times).

.. rubric::  Aggregate data to be forwarded into other analyzers

When passing chunks of data back into Zeek through
``zeek::protocol_data_in``, it can be more efficient to aggregate
multiple chunks inside a temporary variable first, instead of
forwarding each chunk individually. This is because each chunk
forwarded to Zeek will go through its analyzer pipeline individually,
which incurs additional overhead.

.. rubric::  Move fixed local values into global constants

Inside functions and hooks, local variables are created and destroyed
every time the corresponding code executes. For non-trivial types,
that can lead to noticeable overhead. If the locals aren't modified,
consider moving them to global constants instead. (For some particular
expensive, non-mutable types, Spicy performs this optimization
internally already; for example, for regular expressions.)

.. rubric::  Avoid small sized byte fields

Avoid using the ``bytes`` type for fields that could be handled using
integer types. As bytes will always allocate a C++ string under the
hood, using integer types can improve performance.

.. rubric::  Consider outsourcing into C++

> Consider outsourcing complex calculations required for your parsing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider outsourcing complex and performance-critical calculations required for your parsing
```

into custom C++ code. In particular, decoding bytes into special
string representations or peculiar time conversions might be
significantly faster when implemented in C++ directly. See
:ref:`extending` for more on how to do that.

.. rubric::  State-management in analyzers

> Using global maps to retain analyzer state can cause significant
> memory bloating over long(er) periods. The preferred way is to define
> a :ref:`%context <unit_context>` in top-level units and propagate that
> down to populate any maps or other state inside that context. When
> used with Zeek, Spicy ties the context state to individual connections
> that get teared down when the connection state is removed, thereby
> preventing any state space explosion.

Reviewer: Even with a context a long-running connection could still lead to unbounded state growth. Maybe rephrase as

```suggestion
Using global maps to retain analyzer state can cause significant
memory bloating over long(er) periods if not managed correctly. If statekeeping cannot be avoided, the preferred way is to define
a :ref:`%context <unit_context>` in top-level units and propagate that
down to populate any maps or other state inside that context. When
used with Zeek, Spicy ties the context state to individual connections
that get teared down when the connection state is removed, thereby
preventing accidental state space explosion. Even when state tables are stored
in a ``%context`` one still needs to manually make sure that its size does not
grow unbounded (e.g., for long-running connections).
```

.. _performance_toolchain:

Compilation Performance
-----------------------

Depending on the complexity of the Spicy code, it may take a bit (and
sometimes quite a while) to compile your parsers. In the following, we
collect some recommendations to speed up the compile process.

.. note::

>     When processing Spicy code, generally the bulk of the time time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When processing Spicy code, generally the bulk of the time
```

    tends to be spent on compiling the generated C++ code; often about
    80-90%. If you want to see a break-down of where Spicy spends its
    time, run the Spicy compiler with ``--report-times``. In the
    output at the end, ``jit`` refers to compiling generated C++ code.

.. todo::

    Merge in the internal notes we have on speeding up compilation.

.. rubric:: Precompile Headers

Make sure to run :ref:`spicy-precompile-headers
<parser-development-setup>` to speed up C++ compilation a little.

.. rubric:: Faster Debug Builds

During development of new parsers, it helps quite a bit to build
non-optimized debug versions by adding ``--debug`` to the Spicy
compiler's command-line. This emits almost identical code, but then
compiles the generated code without ``-O2`` (i.e., not optimized),
which avoids some work the C++ compiler would otherwise do. The
produced HLTO will perform (much) less well so it is probably not
useful for production.

> .. note::

Reviewer: Let's call this out more strongly.

```suggestion
.. danger::
```
